-------------
Tests Details
-------------

This test configuration is designed to exercise the IP networking software in
conjunction with an i386 CPU.  It includes a number of test service threads,
each of which can be "bound" to any suitable transport layer instance, and thus
to any IP interface.  Simply change the initialization parameters passed to
each one.

Here's a quick summary of the test services (test 1 and 4 are not enabled by
default - their thread initialization is currently commented out):

	* Test 3 provides an "echo" service on port 1235 of its bound
	  interface.  After 10 data segments have arrived the thread
	  will close the connection.  To try it out do something like:

		telnet <addr> 1235
	
	* Test 4 acts as a TCP client.  It will attempt to connect to
	  port 7 (echo service) of 192.168.0.205 when it starts and
	  will then write 10 segments to the port once it is connected.
	  The echo server will send them back and these will be
	  displayed on the debug display.  This test is a good one for
	  proving that retransmissions, etc, work correctly - pull the
	  network cable out mid-transmission to see this happen.  When
	  10 segments have been sent the client will close the
	  connection.

	* Test 5 is a multi-threaded web server on port 80 of its
	  bound interface.

	* Test 6 is a multi-threaded debug service on port 1237 of its
	  bound interface.  Please ensure that your telnet
	  implementation is put into character mode rather than line
	  mode if you're running under Linux (Windows 95 and NT 4.0 do
	  this by default):

		telnet <addr> 1237


------------------
Supported Hardware
------------------

The software expects to run on a standard PC with an i386 or better CPU.  It is
expected that a colour 80x25 text display is fitted and that there is at least
640 kBytes of RAM.

It's unlikely that this software will work unless it's tweaked for your target
hardware environment.  This release supports the three different setups that I
use at the moment.  To use one or another change the commenting of the line
MDEFS= in the main "Makefile".

Four configurations are currently supported, supporting a version that has no
Ethernet or 3 different ISA Ethernet cards.  All cards are assumed to be at
I/O address 0x300 and IRQ 5 (for this release anyway).  Currently the 3 card
types supported are the 3Com 3C509, (Novell & clone) NE2000 and Intel
EtherExpress Pro/10+.


-----------------
Building The Code
-----------------

The code has been built and tested under Linux using egcs v2.91.66 and a
fairly standard set of GNU utilities.

To build the code, ensure that the "i386" libraries have been built and
intalled in the "lib" directory, modify the Makefile in this directory as
necessary, and run "make".
